[Pattern Draft] Managing capacity for reviewing contributions (#692)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: patterns/1-initial/capacity-for-contributions.md

## Title

Managing capacity for reviewing contributions

## Patlet

Reviewing InnerSource contributions takes time and effort. This should be reflected in capacity planning, especially for larger contributions. Expectations and available capacity should be transparent so that contributors understand when their contributions will be reviewed and released.

## Problem

> Large InnerSource contributions are causing delays to other work in the team and/or contributions are taking longer to be released than expected. Reviewing contributions may be significant invisible work, not tracked in a team's agile development process.

Reviewer: Agile is uppercase just like InnerSource is

Author: https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/17b0f76dca1aef13048d6b1ab576ad1fc877b985

* Smaller contributions can still be reviewed ad-hoc.

## Context

Maintainers of a successful InnerSource project are finding it difficult to review contributions, especially large contributions. They do not want to disrupt their team's other work, but also want to support contributions by reviewing/releasing them in a timely fashion.

## Forces

* Contributors expect timely feedback on their contributions
* Maintaining team are expected to deliver other work alongside reviewing contributions
* Missing communication between contributors and maintainers on expectations/lead time for contributions to be reviewed/released
* Tension in prioritizing InnerSource contributions against other work

## Solutions

* Reviewing larger contributions is tracked in the team's ticketing system/bug tracker (e.g. Jira, GitHub issues)
* Maintaining team is given time to review larger contributions in team capacity planning
* Reviewing contributions is prioritized against other work (e.g. in sprint planning)
* Maintainers communicate their capacity for reviewing contributions, the priority of contributions, and an estimate of when a contribution will be reviewed/released

> * Maintaining team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for contributions receiving initial feedback

Reviewer: I love the SLO because it creates productive back pressure, transparency and utility for the development team, product owner, scrum master and project management personnel.

It also layers into moving in alignment with DevOps / SRE / Observability approach.

Reviewer 2: +1 on the SLOs - not only does that create back pressure - it also helps communicate to contributors what expectations can be wrt. to response times. Especially inside of companies those can vary greatly between teams.

Btw. what I found helpful for host teams is to track "time to initial response" - https://github.com/github/issue-metrics (I found that metric way more helpful than something like time to close - time to first response is something you can easily optimise. Time to close not so much because minimising that tends to have nasty side effects.)

## Resulting Context

> Maintaining team understands the overhead of reviewing large contributions and is given capacity to do so. Delivery and product managers are better able to plan, estimate, and track other work in the team by accounting for the time taken to review InnerSource contributions. Contributors understand when their contribution will be reviewed and released, and how long before the maintainers will provide initial feedback.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Maintaining team understands the overhead of reviewing large contributions and is given capacity to do so. Project manager and product managers are better able to plan, estimate, and track other work in the team by accounting for the time taken to review InnerSource contributions. Contributors understand when their contribution will be reviewed and released, and how long before the maintainers will provide initial feedback.
```

Replacing delivery manager with project manager (as discussed with Tom via Slack)

## Known Instances

BBC iPlayer & Sounds

> ## Status (optional until merging)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Status
```

## Forces

* Contributors expect timely feedback on their contributions
* Maintaining team are expected to deliver other work alongside reviewing contributions
* Missing communication between contributors and maintainers on expectations/lead time for contributions to be reviewed/released
* Tension in prioritizing InnerSource contributions against other work

## Solutions

* Reviewing larger contributions is tracked in the team's ticketing system/bug tracker (e.g. Jira, GitHub issues)
* Maintaining team is given time to review larger contributions in team capacity planning
* Reviewing contributions is prioritized against other work (e.g. in sprint planning)
* Maintainers communicate their capacity for reviewing contributions, the priority of contributions, and an estimate of when a contribution will be reviewed/released
* Maintaining team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for contributions receiving initial feedback

## Resulting Context

> Maintaining team understands the overhead of reviewing large contributions and is given capacity to do so. Project manager and product managers are better able to plan, estimate, and track other work in the team by accounting for the time taken to review InnerSource contributions. Contributors understand when their contribution will be reviewed and released, and how long before the maintainers will provide initial feedback.

Reviewer 4: Agree that product and project managers are the best people to filter this before a large PR hits the team unaware. Would be curious to chat and understand the intake process better and what part of that may/may not be working right now.

Author: Yeah I'm making an assumption that there's a foundation of contributions being valued, and even if they are it could be difficult to prioritise them against other work. Some teams may go to the extreme of having a policy of 'merge every contribution' whereas others will be pickier. 

It might also be good to specifically call out that smaller PRs are still dealt with ad-hoc - IMO we wouldn't want smaller PRs being blocked by bureaucracy.

Author: https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/a9382a16e4ef84b4f122364a4a5f908e48fcdb91

https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/d185cf69193131fdf26c7de071fb09320c36067e

Reviewer 2: That matches my observations as well: Small changes tend to be smooth. It is larger changes, either as one PR or multiple ones that are related that cause tension.

## Title

Managing capacity for reviewing contributions

## Patlet

> Reviewing InnerSource contributions takes time and effort. This should be reflected in capacity planning, especially for larger contributions. Expectations and available capacity should be transparent so that contributors understand when their contributions will be reviewed and released.

Reviewer 3: Can a team assume that any contribution will be "released"?
i.e. it could also be rejected entirely, in theory, right?

Reviewer 5: @spier sure, contributions could be rejected for different reasons.
I don't feel strongly either way here, if we should mention it at this point or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reviewing InnerSource contributions takes time and effort. This should be reflected in capacity planning, especially for larger contributions. Expectations and available capacity should be transparent so that contributors understand when their contributions will be reviewed.
```

I am suggesting this change, as the host team likely does not promise a release. They only promise a review :)

Author: The reason I mentioned 'released' is because this is often what really matters to the contributor. It's all very well getting a speedy review, but if this contribution is to unblock some other work, or fix an error in production, they need to know when they might expect a release. Especially if contributing to software that is on a slow e.g. monthly release cycle.

Suggested rewording:

```suggestion
Reviewing InnerSource contributions takes time and effort. This should be reflected in capacity planning, especially for larger contributions. Expectations and available capacity should be transparent so that contributors understand when their contributions will be reviewed and, if accepted, released.
```

Reviewer 3: 👍

## Problem

Large InnerSource contributions are causing delays to other work in the team and/or contributions are taking longer to be released than expected. Reviewing contributions may be significant invisible work, not tracked in a team's agile development process.

## Story

The BBC's connected TV application are built by a number of teams, each with different areas of responsibility. They work on each other's areas of the codebase via InnerSource on a regular basis.

> The team responsible for the build process for the JavaScript bundles received a major pull request, changing how dependencies were bundled. This PR introduced a new build time dependency, a new structure to the deployed JavaScript bundles, and touched 503 files, with 6,699 lines of code added and 2,828 lines of code deleted. A contribution of this size required significant time to code review, test, and ensure the team understood the new tooling and structure introduced. Normally, InnerSource contributions would be reviewed ad-hoc, but the team estimated that this review process would take days rather than hours. Reviewing this PR would have delayed the team's other work, so the team raised this with the team lead, delivery manager, and product manager, to prioritize this work against other work. Time was set aside to review this contribution at future date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The team responsible for the build process for the JavaScript bundles received a major pull request, changing how dependencies were bundled. This PR introduced a new build time dependency, a new structure to the deployed JavaScript bundles, and touched 503 files, with 6,699 lines of code added and 2,828 lines of code deleted. A contribution of this size required significant time to code review, test, and ensure the team understood the new tooling and structure introduced.

Normally, InnerSource contributions would be reviewed ad-hoc, but the team estimated that this review process would take days rather than hours. Reviewing this PR would have delayed the team's other work, so the team raised this with the team lead, project manager, and product manager, to prioritize this work against other work. Time was set aside to review this contribution at a future date.
```

I found it easier to read, when split up.

Reviewer 3: Also changed "delivery manager" to "project manager" as discussed with Tom in Slack.

This process was formalized in the team:

> * Larger contributions have a ticket created on the team's backlog and included in prioritization discussion alongside other tickets. The contributor will be informed of the priority call and given an estimate as to when it will be reviewed and released.

Reviewer 3: Even for new features within the same team, changes with fewer lines of code are easier to review. Therefore many teams prefer to keep PRs as small as possible.

Would it be fair to assume that most teams would still have a preference to receive contributions in smaller chunks, if at all possible?

Author: Definitely agree with this, not sure whether it needs capturing in this pattern or not as sometimes large PRs are unavoidable.

Reviewer 3: Fair point. Let's leave this as is for now.

* Smaller contributions can still be reviewed ad-hoc.

## Context

Maintainers of a successful InnerSource project are finding it difficult to review contributions, especially large contributions. They do not want to disrupt their team's other work, but also want to support contributions by reviewing/releasing them in a timely fashion.

## Forces

* Contributors expect timely feedback on their contributions
* Maintaining team are expected to deliver other work alongside reviewing contributions
* Missing communication between contributors and maintainers on expectations/lead time for contributions to be reviewed/released
* Tension in prioritizing InnerSource contributions against other work

> ## Solutions

Reviewer 5: It might be a good idea to recommend that the contributing team informs the receiving team as early as possible when planning large contributions. One form to operationalize this is through Draft PRs, which allows early feedback, specially if the PR text contain a summary of the planned changes.

Using stacked PRs and slicing the reviews into smaller parts could also help.

Reviewer 3: What I have seen many host teams do is to ask for an issue before creating a PR.

Or in other words, starting the conversation about the **why** and **what** (in an issue) before sending the **how** (in a PR).

We could add a note about this here, if it fits.

And I am even starting to think that this point could work as a new tiny pattern as well a la "Remember to talk to each other before sending code" :)

Reviewer 3: @dellagustin-sap with "stacked PRs" you mean breaking up a larger contribution into multiple PRs that should be reviewed in a specific sequence? i.e. first PR1, then PR2, then PR3, ...?

Reviewer 5: @spier , I'm not sure that there is a well understood definition for the term "stacked PRs", but what I meant was something like:
1. Create a DRAFT PR based on a feature branch explaining the change that is going to be sent
2. Instead of committing your changes in one go to the new feature branch, send small incremental PRs to the new feature branch, as soon as you have new code that can be reviewed, this way the team can review small pieces until the feature is ready to be merged as a whole

This only works of course if the change can be split into small increments. That's not always the case.

Author: > It might be a good idea to recommend that the contributing team informs the receiving team as early as possible when planning large contributions.

Yes I will add this. There are a few methods I think worth mentioning: drafts PRs (per @dellagustin-sap), issues (per @spier), RFCs, or even an informal conversation e.g. in Slack

> small incremental PRs

Definitely agree this is preferable but goes a little beyond the scope of this pattern. Small increments is IMO best practice for Agile, InnerSource, CD... Perhaps I'll mention this in 'forces' - something like 'contributors already strive to make small PRs, but find instances where larger PRs are unavoidable.'

Author: https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/f4bdb57642afca998839c35016ed78f2f60e3fe3

https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/d9d5e284a5820b3f6fb2d82767f0326d417117b7

Reviewer 3: Amazing changes @tsadler1988!

@dellagustin-sap as you started this particular thread, would you mind giving this a review? And  while you are at it, possibly even leaving an official review on the PR, to confirm that I am not the only one approving it.

Cheers :)

Reviewer 2: IIRC we even mention the "please talk to the receiving team before submitting a PR" part in the learning path :)

It's one of the things that I keep telling people even in open source: Don't send a PR as your first line of communication. Nothing is more frustrating than going though learning the project, making the modification work and then being told that the receiving team does not accept it - no matter how good the reason may be.

Reviewer 3: I believe the comments in this thread have been worked into the content. Resolving the thread.

* Reviewing larger contributions is tracked in the team's ticketing system/bug tracker (e.g. Jira, GitHub issues)

> * Maintaining team is given time to review larger contributions in team capacity planning

Reviewer 3: How do you do this? This suggests that the team knows that a contribution is about to come in, right? i.e. the contributing team has already spoken to the host team about this before, I assume?

Author: https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/f4bdb57642afca998839c35016ed78f2f60e3fe3

* Reviewing contributions is prioritized against other work (e.g. in sprint planning)
* Maintainers communicate their capacity for reviewing contributions, the priority of contributions, and an estimate of when a contribution will be reviewed/released
* Maintaining team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for contributions receiving initial feedback

## Resulting Context

> Maintaining team understands the overhead of reviewing large contributions and is given capacity to do so. Delivery and product managers are better able to plan, estimate, and track other work in the team by accounting for the time taken to review InnerSource contributions. Contributors understand when their contribution will be reviewed and released, and how long before the maintainers will provide initial feedback.

Reviewer 3: "Maintainers" and "Maintaining team" is used interchangeably.

Could we use only one of these terms, to make things simpler?

Btw I don't know if overall we have a preference in our patterns for a term related to this.
I have seen both "maintainer" and "host team" being used.

Author: Yeah that's a good point. Happy to replace all uses of 'maintainers' and 'maintaining team' with 'host team' instead.

Author: https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/692/commits/47ef2ceded358a75543ff158b5be85a6a765c7c6

> ## Rationale (optional)
> 
> Explains why this is the right solution; using totally different words WHY this solution balances these forces and this context to solve this problem.
> Can expand on what-if's or theories.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

We can always add this again at a later point, if we like.

## Known Instances

BBC iPlayer & Sounds

## Status (optional until merging)

> General pattern status is stored in GitHub's Label tagging - see any pull request.
> Note that this GitHub label tagging becomes less visible once the pattern is finalized and merged, so having some information in this field is helpful.
> 
> You might store other related info here, such as review history: "Three of us reviewed this on 2/5/17 and it needs John's expertise before it can go further."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initial
```

## Title

Managing capacity for reviewing contributions

## Patlet

Reviewing InnerSource contributions takes time and effort. This should be reflected in capacity planning, especially for larger contributions. Expectations and available capacity should be transparent so that contributors understand when their contributions will be reviewed and, if accepted, released.

## Problem

Large InnerSource contributions are causing delays to other work in the team and/or contributions are taking longer to be released than expected. Reviewing contributions may be significant invisible work, not tracked in a team's Agile development process.

## Story

> The BBC's connected TV application are built by a number of teams, each with different areas of responsibility. They work on each other's areas of the codebase via InnerSource on a regular basis.

Reviewer 6: A minor comment. Typically in patterns, the story is generalized to not mention a specific company or institution (it's a *pattern*, so it ideally should be described in ways that can be applied to other companies/users). So, maybe:
An application developed by a company for use by users outside the company is built by a number of teams, each with different areas of responsibility.

The specific information becomes apparent in the known instances reference.

Reviewer 3: To get this pattern merged into the mainline I will let this one slide.
We rarely have stories in our patterns anyways, so i would rather have a too specific story than none :)

We can still fix this once we add the second known instance of this.

Author: ```suggestion
An application is built by a number of teams, each with different areas of responsibility. They work on each other's areas of the codebase via InnerSource on a regular basis.
```

Happy to anonymise the story. The rest of it is specific to this real example, is this OK or would further generalisation be a potential future improvement?

The team responsible for the build process for the JavaScript bundles received a major pull request, changing how dependencies were bundled. This PR introduced a new build time dependency, a new structure to the deployed JavaScript bundles, and touched 503 files, with 6,699 lines of code added and 2,828 lines of code deleted. A contribution of this size required significant time to code review, test, and ensure the team understood the new tooling and structure introduced.

Normally, InnerSource contributions would be reviewed ad-hoc, but the team estimated that this review process would take days rather than hours. Reviewing this PR would have delayed the team's other work, so the team raised this with the team lead, project manager, and product manager, to prioritize this work against other work. Time was set aside to review this contribution at a future date.

This process was formalized in the team:

> * Larger contributions have a ticket created on the team's backlog and included in prioritization discussion alongside other tickets. The contributor will be informed of the priority call and given an estimate as to when it will be reviewed and released.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Larger contributions have a ticket created on the team's backlog and included in prioritization discussion alongside other tickets.
* The contributor will be informed of the priority call and given an estimate as to when it will be reviewed and released.
```

* Missing communication between contributors and host team on expectations/lead time for contributions to be reviewed/released
* Tension in prioritizing InnerSource contributions against other work
* Contributors already strive to make small PRs in line with Agile, InnerSource, and Continuous Delivery principles, but find instances where larger PRs are unavoidable

## Solutions

* Contributors are encouraged to give the host team early visibility of larger contributions (e.g. via GitHub Issues, draft PRs, [RFCs](../2-structured/transparent-cross-team-decision-making-using-rfcs.md), or informal discussions) and are made aware that not doing so could delay review of their contribution
* Reviewing larger contributions is tracked in the team's ticketing system/bug tracker (e.g. Jira, GitHub issues)
* Host team is given time to review larger contributions in team capacity planning
* Reviewing contributions is prioritized against other work (e.g. in sprint planning)
* Host team communicate their capacity for reviewing contributions, the priority of contributions, and an estimate of when a contribution will be reviewed/released

> * Host team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for contributions receiving initial feedback

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Host team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for providing initial feedback to new contributions 
```

* Smaller contributions are still reviewed ad-hoc; the team may have guidelines on what they consider to be a smaller contribution (e.g. review should take less than an hour)

## Resulting Context

Host team understands the overhead of reviewing large contributions and is given capacity to do so. Project manager and product managers are better able to plan, estimate, and track other work in the team by accounting for the time taken to review InnerSource contributions. Contributors understand when their contribution will be reviewed and released, and how long before the host team will provide initial feedback.

Smaller PRs are still reviewed ad-hoc, minimising overhead and unnecessary additional process.

There may still be conflict in prioritising contribution reviews, especially if the host team is overburdened with other work. This only works if contributions are valued by the decision makers in the team's planning process.

## Known Instances

> BBC iPlayer & Sounds

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- BBC iPlayer & Sounds
```

## Title

> Managing capacity for reviewing contributions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Managing Capacity for Reviewing Contributions
```

Normally, InnerSource contributions would be reviewed ad-hoc, but the team estimated that this review process would take days rather than hours. Reviewing this PR would have delayed the team's other work, so the team raised this with the team lead, project manager, and product manager, to prioritize this work against other work. Time was set aside to review this contribution at a future date.

This process was formalized in the team:

* Larger contributions have a ticket created on the team's backlog and included in prioritization discussion alongside other tickets.
* The contributor will be informed of the priority call and given an estimate as to when it will be reviewed and released.
* Smaller contributions can still be reviewed ad-hoc.

## Context

> Host team of a successful InnerSource project are finding it difficult to review contributions, especially large contributions. They do not want to disrupt their team's other work, but also want to support contributions by reviewing/releasing them in a timely fashion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Host team of a successful InnerSource project are finding it difficult to review contributions, especially large contributions.
* They do not want to disrupt their team's other work, but also want to support contributions by reviewing/releasing them in a timely fashion.
```

* Missing communication between contributors and host team on expectations/lead time for contributions to be reviewed/released
* Tension in prioritizing InnerSource contributions against other work
* Contributors already strive to make small PRs in line with Agile, InnerSource, and Continuous Delivery principles, but find instances where larger PRs are unavoidable

## Solutions

* Contributors are encouraged to give the host team early visibility of larger contributions (e.g. via GitHub Issues, draft PRs, [RFCs](../2-structured/transparent-cross-team-decision-making-using-rfcs.md), or informal discussions) and are made aware that not doing so could delay review of their contribution
* Reviewing larger contributions is tracked in the team's ticketing system/bug tracker (e.g. Jira, GitHub issues)
* Host team is given time to review larger contributions in team capacity planning
* Reviewing contributions is prioritized against other work (e.g. in sprint planning)
* Host team communicate their capacity for reviewing contributions, the priority of contributions, and an estimate of when a contribution will be reviewed/released

> * Host team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for providing initial feedback to new contributions 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Host team has a service level objective (SLO) (e.g. 2 working days) for providing initial feedback to new contributions
```
